[Music]
Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to start with abstract algebra and we're going
to introduce the simplest kinds of objects that
are broadly used in undergraduate mathematics
which are linear spaces or vector spaces but our
approach to these will be a little bit different
because we're motivated by our data structure
point of view so our strategy is to base things on
these very familiar arenas that we've had lots of
experience with the natural numbers the integers
and the rational numbers and in particular we're
going to consider today the simplest operation
only which is addition so we want to generalize
what's happening with these very simple kinds of
arenas with just the simplest operation so let's
remind ourselves that when we take 2 plus 3 equals
5 what's really happening there is we have a
M set of 2 is really the MSR consisting of a
couple of marks and there's the M set consisting
of three marks and we're really adding these M
sets and when we take the difference a 3 minus
4 equals minus 1 in this arena here we are also
doing something that's pretty well M set addition
this is really the same as 3 plus minus 4 equals
minus 1 and we can look at it from an M set point
of view by taking this M set here which is 3 and
here's the M set minus 4 which consists of these
anti marks for them and when we add these two
things we get the M set consisting of a single
anti mark which is minus 1 so in all of these
cases the addition the basic operation is really
addition of am sets and that's going to be the
the key point that we're going to structure our
initial abstract algebra objects on em sets are
not that familiar kinds of data structures for
most undergraduate mathematics these days and so
maybe we don't really appreciate just how flexible
and useful they are as a tool for building up
abstract algebra but a key property alright the
key point is that we can always add em sets here's
an EM set no matter what it contains and here's
another em set no matter what it contains we can
always add those em sets just dump out the two
boxes into another box now we don't need to have
two of them we can have three or four or more of
them we can have lots of containers we can just
add them all together to get one big cumulative
container so it's a very easy conceptual kind
of operation that's really underlying what we're
doing here okay so suppose that a a B and C are
M sets from some given context okay so we have
some specific context we have legitimate M sets
coming from that context let's call them a B and
C it's actually not that important that there's
three of them I just want to employ three of them
rather than the usual two to get you used to the
idea that this is not really a binary situation
predominantly okay so we have these M sets a B
and C what can we do with them well we can always
add them together in various ways we can take 8
plus B we can take 2a which is just the same as a
plus a we can take a plus B plus C we could take
a more sophisticated combination like 2a plus 3b
or maybe even 5a plus 2b plus 7c all these are
just direct obvious generalizations of dumping
things out into a bigger box ok so motivated by
this let's say that if a B and C are M sets then
any M set of the form ka plus lb plus M C where
K L and M are natural numbers any such m set is a
linear combination of a in sync so we'll introduce
this idea of a linear combination of AM sets it
is a basic kind of vector terminology but we're
not really working in a vector situation with
geometrical vectors here we're just working this
much broader context of just having M sets we're
talking about taking linear combinations of M sets
now this slide here reinforces the idea that we
do not necessarily have to restrict ourselves to
a binary operation we're considering the addition
of M sets in a more general way so for example if
we have M sets a B C and D and they have various
elements we can add all four of them together at
once so here for example we're dumping out the
contents of a which might be something called
K and another thing called X and something else
come to L and to things called Y this be we're
dumping out there's an X as an is ed see we're
getting X and Zed D outcomes X Y and W because
all these things are just being dumped out and
there's no need therefore for us to fuss around
about brackets we can just write a plus B plus C
plus D intrinsically fundamentally and if we want
to write down what that answer is well we just
collect all these various things kxly Y X and
X and X Y w in no particular order and that's the
cumulative sum so it's a little bit different kind
of orientation because usually in abstract algebra
we concentrate on binary operations but here the
M set point of view really gives us a broader
picture okay so now let's introduce the idea of
the span of some multi sets so if a B and C are
multi sets and so is m and these are from some
context so we're assuming that we have some given
context in which we've generated some meaningful m
sets we don't have a general definition of what
an M Cestius we build up the notion of M sets
step by step little and we create more and more
complicated em sense so what we're just proposing
here is that we have some prior arena in which
we have defined well defined objects with our
ham sets of stuff okay and here they are we've
got em a B and C we are now going to define the
following thing we're gonna say that M is in the
span of a B and C precisely when M is a linear
combination of a B and C in the sense that we've
just described so M being a linear combination
of a B and C that's exactly what we mean when we
say that M is in the span of a B and C and note
that I've put a B and C so together in in fact
an M set so I've created a bigger container that
contains the a B and C which are the ingredients
of the linear combinations were considering so
for example if a is the M set 1 to 2 that's an
M set of numbers in fact natural numbers and B
is the M set 1 3 then this one here 1 1 1 2 2
3 3 that's an AM set that is in the span of a
and B why is that well the claim is that this is a
linear combination of a and B and can we see what
it is we're going to have to have two of these and
one of these so this thing here is in fact a plus
two B we can write it as a linear combination of
these given M sets and this one here 2 2 2 2 1 3
1 1 it's also in the span of a B let's see if we
can check that so how are we going to write this
as a combination of these two well I guess we're
going to need two of these because we have four
2's here 2 2 0 no twos here's a little take two of
these and one of those that will generate the 1 3
there and 2 of these gives us four 2's and once
so this thing here is 2a plus B this one was a
plus 2b this is 2a plus B both of them are in the
span of a B so here's a practical kind of example
of this in real life suppose we ask what amounts
of money can be expressed using only 10 cent and
25 cent coins or pieces well so any such amount
in cents must be a multiple of 5 because these
are both multiples of 5 so anything that we get
as some of these various things will have to be
a multiple of 5 but not all multiples of 5 can be
obtained obviously for example 5 itself cannot be
obtained using just a collection of 10 and 25 cent
pieces so the ones that can be obtained are well
first of all 0 10 cents is of course included in
20 cents as well because that's just two of those
at 25 but notice that 5 and 15 are missing here 30
and then 35 and then 40 and then 45 and 15 picture
in fact it's not too hard to see that after this
point here we can get any multiple of 5 by just
using 10 cent and 25 cent pieces so all positive
multiples except for 5 and 15 are obtainable this
way so in a multi set language what we're doing
is we're talking really about the span of 10 and
25 where we're thinking as having 10 and 25 being
M sets which of course they are because natural
numbers are M sets so taking linear combinations
of these things fits inside the discussion that
we've had so far so for example 35 is an element
of span 10 25 because it can be written as one of
these plus one of those alright now let's have
a look at a little bit of a richer situation in
two dimensions so we're going to look at some
two-dimensional spans so here is our usual XY
plane but we've labeled it x1 and x2 ok and let's
start with these two vectors E and F where E is
the usual standard basis vector 1 0 and F is the
standard basis vector is 0 1 now this traditional
notation for vector can be sort of translated
into our somewhat more modern or novel framework
but they even as perhaps this row freeze here 0
1 0 we're really supposing that we're starting
our indices here with one and two because the
axes are labeled X 1 X 2 and so we're agreeing
that there's no zero component in this situation
so there's the vector E and there's the vector F
either as vectors or as sort of rib axles ok so
what would the span of EF be then the span of EF
is just those vessels that we can obtain by taking
linear combinations of these ones so in fact what
we end up getting is this green lattice here this
lattice kind of a square lattice that occupies a
quarter of the plane so one quadrant because we're
only allowed to take positive combinations of the
two vectors that's the critical thing so any
vector like down there could be obtained by a
certain number of e's and a certain number of F's
more interesting perhaps is if we choose some more
random kind of vectors so let's consider V equals
3 1 which is that vector there and you which is 1
2 2 that vector there in our freeze notation this
would be written this way this will be written
this way now span of UV which refers to linear
combinations positive linear combinations of you
has a nice geometrical shape like this so there
would be V there's to be there's you there's to
you here is U plus V this one would be V Plus you
to these plus a you would be this one here I want
you do that algebraically to V Plus u would be
six plus one that'd be seven the two times this
persistent before so this is the vector seven
four so the span of EF is this green lattice
and a span of UV is this blue lapis in some sense
they look quite the same algebraically I hope you
can see there's some kind of similarity between
the two of them even though they physically look
different now I have to remind you that when we're
adding vectors from our point of view vectors
are really just vexos and vexos are just multi
sets of Singleton's so the addition of vectors
component wise is really just a reflection of
the more fundamental multi-set addition of the
underlying vessels so we really are working in the
context of adding multi sets here and when we're
talking about these these kinds of vectors okay so
now let's increase the subtlety by throwing in a
third vector so we had V equals 3 1 and u equals 1
2 and now let's consider a third vector W which is
2 2 so I've zoomed out a little bit here to give
you a bigger picture there is the vector V which
is 3 1 there's the vector U which is 1 2 and now
we have this vector W which is 2 2 as well now
in blue here you can see the former span of just
U and V just all possible combinations of U and
V and these that we can see of course it extends
upwards there but now we want to consider the span
of V U and W the span of all three vectors which
means we're allowing ourselves khamenei linear
combinations of all three vectors so for example
not only do we have W but we also have W plus V
W plus 2 V and W plus 2 V Plus u W plus 2 B plus 2
u W plus 2 V plus 3u w + 2 v + 4 u etc so I've now
added in these sort of empty circles these are
now the additional vectors that are augmenting
the V u span when we throw in the W as well now
if we stare at this for a little while you can
see that's what happens seemingly is that as we go
further up in this direction then we start getting
pretty well most points or most vectors there that
are on our basic integral lattice but down here
ones were sort of starting out we're not getting
every such vector we're only getting some of them
and it's a little bit half hazard so describing
something like this precisely it's not impossible
but it's certainly much more complicated than it
was when we just had two vectors U and V so what
we've really kind of done is we've taken an M set
of M sense you haven't said it this way but that's
sort of what we're doing we're taking a bunch
of am sets to start off with but a bunch of M
sets is really like an M set of M sets because
in principle we're not excluding the possibility
that there might be some repetitions amongst the M
sets that we're starting with so let me represent
that by this example so here we have M which is
an M set consisting of the MCS a B and C we have
an M set of M sets and now span of M that is the
M sets which are linear combinations of a B and
C so before I really span and then brackets a B
and C but now we can just rights and M because M
is the M set which is containing a B and C so
we can regard span and M now as something like
a type okay it's describing certain M sets M sets
which are linear combinations of a B and C so it's
a little bit like a type but we prefer perhaps to
use the term space so we might like to talk about
the space span of AB so we're gonna regard this
term as I met a mathematical notion at this point
so we're not going to define precisely what space
means just as we haven't really defined precisely
what a type is we've just been using this a little
bit informally and we're gonna do the same kind of
thing for a space okay but it's a useful kind of
terminology I think and it connects with the usual
terminology and linear algebra okay so we've
actually been quite naive all what we've done
is we've just taken some M sets put them in a box
so called that an M set of incense and then we're
considering the span of that box which is linear
combinations of the M sets that we chosen so this
is a very simple-minded kind of way of creating
an algebraic structure but it already has most
of the properties of what's called a vector space
or a linear space in modern linear algebra namely
let's describe it this way so we'll suppose that
we have span of M M is some M set of M sets like
perhaps you can think of M is the M set consisting
of a B and C where a B and C are M sets so we're
going to take UV and W in this span so each of
these is a linear combination of the elements
of M and let's take N and M to be natural numbers
now here are properties of the arithmetic of these
linear combinations and they're really all very
familiar to us because we're just iterating things
that we already know about the way we add em sets
so you plus the plus W equals u plus V plus W this
basic associativity which is really just saying
that the order doesn't matter we've emphasized
this already it's not really a binary operation
so it doesn't doesn't depend on what order we
put things in U plus V equals V Plus u yes it's
commutative because there's no order when we empty
boxes into a bigger box zero plus V equals V ok
that's interesting so the zero here refers to our
particular amp set the MTM set that's what 0 is
0 is the MTM set and we're saying that if we take
the empty m set and add another hand set well that
we get the other M set and we know that that's
true these properties have to do with multiplying
an M set by a natural number so if we have U and V
and our M sets and we take their sum and then we
multiplied by n like 2 or 3 then we get n u plus
NV on the other hand if we take the sum of two
numbers and plus M and multiply u by that some
that's the same as n times u plus M times u so we
have to kind of distributive properties one with
respect to the amp sets and one with respect to
the natural numbers and then there's another kind
of sort of multiplicative law with respect to
multiplying by numbers namely that if we take a
mess on you and we multiply it by the number m and
then we multiply that by the number n the result
is to same as taking you and just multiplying by
the number and M and finally if we take an M set
u and we multiply by the number 1 then we just
get the set back yeah okay so these are pretty
well the usual ingredients or the definition of a
vector space so when you study linear algebra and
you eventually get to defining a linear space or
a vector space these are amongst the properties
in fact they're almost all of the properties
there's essentially only one other property
that we don't have and that distinguishes what
we've done today from what we're gonna do next
time which is sort of linear spaces proper this
is just a preliminary to that because we don't
have integers floating around or more particularly
we don't have rational numbers so far our numbers
are just natural numbers we're only allowing
ourselves to multiply em sets by two or three
or five or one or zero but not by -1 or minus 7 or
4/3 ok that's really the only distinction between
what we have here and the linear algebra that's
really the studied in undergraduate mathematics
but it's important to realize that what we
do have is really just M set arithmetic we
haven't really gone past or beyond things which
are very familiar to us we're just doing basic
msn arithmetic so in our next video we want to go
further and we want to we really want this minus
1 ok the minus 1 allows us to subtract as well
as add and that's going to have a an important
technical effect that it's going to eliminate
the kind of strange behavior that we saw when
we looked at the span of those three vectors in
the planar situation where you had some uniformity
up in this area but the bottom of it was rather
sporadic and unpredictable ok so when we go from
natural numbers to integers as coefficients of
our linear combinations then things become much
simpler and more manageable sort of conceptually
or theoretically so there's big advantages that
see next time I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman Wildbergers thanks for listening [Music]